[Unknown]: I. V. M.
[Amit Varma]: I had a strange dream the other day.
[Amit Varma]: I dreamed I was a fly on the wall at a swayamvar in 1973.
[Amit Varma]: Now a swayamvar is a practice in which a bunch of men,
[Amit Varma]: all dressed up and objectified,
[Amit Varma]: line up in a hall while a woman walks among them
[Amit Varma]: with a garland in her hand.
[Amit Varma]: She picks one of these men as her marital partner
[Amit Varma]: and puts a garland around him.
[Amit Varma]: Now the swayamvar is an ancient tradition,
[Amit Varma]: but this was a modern swayamvar.
[Amit Varma]: The girl was allowed to ask questions.
[Amit Varma]: So the girl was walking up to each man
[Amit Varma]: and asking him just one question.
[Amit Varma]: What did he do for a living?
[Amit Varma]: The first contender was a thin boy
[Amit Varma]: with thick glasses wearing a dhoti kurta.
[Amit Varma]: What do you do for a living, she asked him.
[Amit Varma]: He said, I am doing my PhD in aeronautics.
[Amit Varma]: She shrugged and went to the next guy.
[Amit Varma]: The next chap, his hair slicked back in a center parting,
[Amit Varma]: wearing a beige churidar kurta with the jacket of a safari suit,
[Amit Varma]: said, I am an IAS officer.
[Amit Varma]: The garland twitched in her fingers,
[Amit Varma]: but she walked away.
[Amit Varma]: The next person in line was a tall, geeky, tambram in a vesti.
[Amit Varma]: She asked him the same question.
[Amit Varma]: He replied, I am a software engineer.
[Amit Varma]: See, this is 1973 and you may wonder what that is,
[Amit Varma]: but wait 30 years and I'll be the hottest thing around.
[Amit Varma]: She very rudely showed him a thanga and walked on.
[Amit Varma]: Finally, she came to a young man wearing a flowery t-shirt and bell-bottom pants.
[Amit Varma]: He had the face of Prem Chopra and the swagger of Amitabh Bachchan.
[Amit Varma]: She asked him the same question and he replied,
[Amit Varma]: I do import-export.
[Amit Varma]: And well, the story ends here.
[Amit Varma]: They lived happily ever after.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Unknown]: Seen and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Import-export was quite the buzzword in the 1970s, especially in Bollywood.
[Amit Varma]: But importers and exporters are in bad shape these days.
[Amit Varma]: One small reason for that is a topic for the show.
[Amit Varma]: The FTP 2015-2020, the foreign trade policy 2015-2020,
[Amit Varma]: which is supposed to help our importers and exporters, but ends up harming both of them.
[Amit Varma]: To discuss this unseen effects, I spoke to Sudhanshu Neema,
[Amit Varma]: who was my guest on this show last week as well, when we spoke about Obamacare.
[Amit Varma]: Here's how our conversation went.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the show, Sudhanshu.
[Guest]: Thank you very much. It's very nice to be here again.
[Amit Varma]: Sudhanshu, the FTP 2015-2020, the foreign trade policy,
[Amit Varma]: a very impressive document made with the best intentions meant to help our exporters and to protect our farmers.
[Amit Varma]: Everything about it sounds good.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit more about it in terms of what its intentions were and tell me what its unseen effects are.
[Guest]: So the intention behind the trade policy was to promote exports of India so that government can own foreign currency.
[Guest]: Now, I don't see the point of earning that.
[Guest]: We already have $400 billion of foreign currency and I don't see why the government is getting greedy and collecting more foreign currency.
[Guest]: So that's one part of it.
[Guest]: Secondly, the government wanted to promote exports so that people would be manufacturing in India, creating jobs and then exporting their goods and services outside India.
[Amit Varma]: Made in India.
[Guest]: Yeah. So that's the Prime Minister's vision of making in India and then selling it outside the country.
[Guest]: So that's and then there was when it comes to import policy, our intention is to protect domestic producers, essentially farmers.
[Guest]: Sometimes there are other industries which need protection.
[Guest]: The government has defined those industries and say that, OK, we will not allow import on this industries because of, you know, this, this, this reasons.
[Guest]: So they want to protect some of the domestic producers and they subsidize the exporters with a view to create manufacturing and export.
[Guest]: So what they're doing is they are creating jobs in India.
[Guest]: Now those are the intended effects of the foreign trade policy.
[Guest]: But what actually happens is not what you will see on the paper or what the government declares.
[Guest]: What has started happening now since the government gives export credit to people who export goods and services, this credit is given in form of a tax benefit.
[Guest]: has to be funded by taxpayers. Basically people like you and me should pay taxes
[Guest]: so exporters can export their goods and services to foreign countries. Now often
[Guest]: these foreign countries are rich countries. So we are actually subsidizing
[Guest]: goods and services going to for example US or Germany. Now that sounds completely
[Guest]: ridiculous to me. Why should a third world country subsidize the people
[Amit Varma]: living in a first world country. So that's crazy. So to make the exporters
[Amit Varma]: competitive they are given this tax credit which is basically being
[Amit Varma]: obviously funded by you and me. So what is happening is it's a redistribution of
[Amit Varma]: wealth from the normal poor taxpayer like us to first the exporter who
[Amit Varma]: therefore can price his goods cheaper which therefore helps the people who are
[Amit Varma]: buying from him and makes him attractive to them and therefore at another level
[Amit Varma]: it ends up being a redistribution of wealth from the poor of a poor third
[Amit Varma]: world country India to the rich of a first world nation. And rich of India as
[Guest]: well because those are the ones who will produce and they make all the profit
[Guest]: right they don't since they get tax credits they don't have to pay taxes on
[Guest]: that on whatever money they make and we have to pay taxes because if they don't
[Guest]: pay taxes somebody has to fund the government right and Indian government
[Amit Varma]: does so much of things that somebody has to fund. I'll just make a small digression here to
[Amit Varma]: point something out a lot of people say that hey only 3% of Indians pay
[Amit Varma]: taxes or whatever but that's income tax they're talking about 100% of Indians
[Amit Varma]: pay taxes so even if your maidservant is buying a bag of salt or someone who
[Amit Varma]: might be begging at a traffic signal is buying a little bit of soap even they
[Amit Varma]: are paying taxes because all of those items are taxed and taxes hurt the poor
[Guest]: far more than they hurt the middle class like us. Yes and that's that's one part
[Guest]: the taxes then there's other things like if your manufacturers are incentivized
[Guest]: to sell goods to foreign countries they don't want to sell it to Indians right
[Guest]: like let's say I am producing high quality tea I'll sell it to US why
[Guest]: should I sell it here because if I make money or any profit I'll have to pay
[Guest]: taxes plus it's much harder to do business here than to doing business in
[Amit Varma]: US. So here's what happens let's say you're a tea manufacturer and I'm a
[Amit Varma]: consumer first of all the first crime is that I am being forced to subsidize you
[Amit Varma]: to manufacture cheap so you can sell it for cheaper and the second crime is that
[Amit Varma]: because therefore you're incentivized to sell your tea outside and export it the
[Amit Varma]: supply of tea within India therefore gets restricted and becomes more
[Guest]: expensive for me so it's I'm being taxed doubly. Yes you are exactly so you are
[Guest]: first paying higher cost for your tea and second you're paying some American
[Guest]: some money indirectly to buy cheaper tea so that's the one side of it. Now let's
[Guest]: come to import policy when it comes to import in the name of protecting certain
[Guest]: manufacturers mostly farmers the government has put a ban on most
[Guest]: agricultural products or they put a quota call it whatever means they
[Guest]: sometimes will put a ban sometimes will put a quota sometimes they'll say we
[Guest]: will import only from this countries and not those countries so they have you
[Guest]: know lots of policies they have more than 7,000 categories of goods on which
[Guest]: there are different layers of taxes so that's so what the government is trying
[Guest]: to do the intention is to protect farmers because if we can buy cheaper
[Guest]: food from foreign countries our farmers will theoretically lose money but
[Guest]: that's not how it works there's other side to it right there are consumers
[Guest]: there are people who consume food and they deserve to buy cheaper food there are
[Guest]: millions of very poor people in India who are not into farming who are urban
[Guest]: poor who live in slums they do not have enough money to buy food and if they can
[Guest]: buy cheaper rice or cheaper wheat we should be able to provide it to them
[Guest]: that's is this we are killing people with this policies and when it comes to
[Guest]: farmers this policies that have been in place for not just this 2015 to 20
[Guest]: policy we have had this similar policies since independence this policies have
[Guest]: kept the farmers poor because farmers now don't diversify they depend on the
[Guest]: government they know that whatever they produce will get them results because if
[Guest]: nothing happens the government will buy it or put a ban on import of that
[Guest]: commodity so now farmers don't invest in developing techniques or increasing
[Guest]: their farm yield because they have become dependent on this government
[Guest]: assistance so firstly you have higher cost to all consumers and then farmers
[Guest]: remaining poor and trapped in this vicious circle of poverty and then
[Guest]: there is a third effect this impedes our economic growth because let's say I can
[Guest]: buy rice for much cheaper cost I save some money and this money would go in
[Guest]: buying other goods and services so those people also lose out so for example let's
[Guest]: say I save thousand rupees a year in buying rice I will use this thousand to
[Guest]: let's say buy a new pair of shoes so this shoemaker will also get this money
[Guest]: and he will also make profit and pay taxes on so on yeah so it's it's a huge
[Amit Varma]: cost on the whole society so what all these import tariffs basically do is
[Amit Varma]: number one the price of goods go up because the market is not as wide as it
[Amit Varma]: would otherwise be if you were to allow cheap imports number two they
[Amit Varma]: incentivize the farmer to just keep making the same thing that they're
[Amit Varma]: making because they are protected by this law and you have minimum support
[Amit Varma]: prices and so on and so forth and the market pressures that would make them
[Amit Varma]: that maybe diversify their crops or maybe look for innovate in search of
[Amit Varma]: higher productivity that movement that growth never happens yes and that locks
[Guest]: them in a poverty cycle so they become dependent on government's handouts so
[Guest]: now we have recently seen farmers taking asking for loan waivers agitating in
[Guest]: Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan and Maharashtra and UP and the governments
[Guest]: are paying 50,000 crore 25,000 crore rupees as a loan waiver now let's not
[Guest]: go into loan waivers that's also very unseen and effects of that and we had an
[Guest]: episode on that earlier yeah so this loan waivers cost taxpayer so again you
[Guest]: and I end up paying for this policies in some way or the other first it's higher
[Guest]: food than is taxes then it's you know those farmers not contributing and once
[Guest]: their productivity increases we also benefit from that right because our
[Guest]: national income goes up the government revenue goes up so we get more
[Guest]: government services so it's not just losing one part of it or is the whole
[Guest]: bigger picture you lose a lot on a lot of fronts and beside we lose a lot more
[Guest]: in banning agriculture produced from rich country to us because America and
[Guest]: Canada most of European Union they give extremely high amount of subsidies to
[Guest]: their farmers to produce wheat and rice and other basic agricultural produce we
[Guest]: should just buy it from them because it's cheaper they are subsidizing we
[Guest]: should just take money from their taxpayers because coming to us for free
[Guest]: and all we need to do is nothing basically we just need to stand at our
[Guest]: port pay some money take this goods in and distribute and what that would then
[Amit Varma]: do is that would lead to cost savings among the consumers and they would spend
[Amit Varma]: that money elsewhere which would grow the economy in other ways and provide
[Amit Varma]: more opportunities and that would also force the farmers to innovate and be
[Amit Varma]: productive and maybe find maybe diversify their crops and you know grow
[Amit Varma]: move into other things and of course I've you know if someone's listening to
[Amit Varma]: this podcast for the first time if you go over to seen unseen or die and you'll
[Amit Varma]: find in my archives various episodes where we've talking about we've spoken
[Amit Varma]: about agricultural problems and how farmers are just trapped in agriculture
[Amit Varma]: because of just a variety of regulations and this is just one of them so that's
[Amit Varma]: that's like an absolutely crazy problem but what kind of amuses me and it's a
[Amit Varma]: very perverse kind of humor here is that this export and this import are different
[Amit Varma]: export and import policies do two things number one they force us to subsidize
[Amit Varma]: rich countries and number two they stop us from taking their subsidies yes so
[Amit Varma]: poor Indian taxpayers end up paying for American and British consumers yes and
[Amit Varma]: when American taxpayers and British taxpayers are paying for food that could
[Amit Varma]: benefit us and make it cheaper for us we turn our back on that that sounds
[Guest]: completely crazy why would we do that well to protect farmers and government
[Guest]: and the government's rely on farmers vote so they keep doing it and without
[Guest]: realizing and even farmers don't realize that every year asking for minimum
[Guest]: support price or this or that it keeps them poor they have been poor for 60
[Guest]: years or so and they will remain so if we do not change these policies because
[Guest]: they have no incentive to get out of farming and since we pay a lot more for
[Guest]: these goods which are produced within the country first because all the
[Guest]: higher quality goods are exported out of the country so we have higher cost in
[Guest]: the country so consumers don't save all this money if this money was saved we
[Guest]: would expand it elsewhere essentially buying goods and services from farmers
[Guest]: so they would have a incentive to diversify into different types of crops
[Guest]: once they do that they would have more productivity they would have more jobs
[Amit Varma]: they would have more opportunity and if other crazy laws didn't exist like the
[Amit Varma]: laws which stop you from selling agricultural land for non-agricultural
[Guest]: purposes there would just be much fewer farmers which yes exactly as every
[Amit Varma]: country goes you follow that trajectory where less and less people are in
[Amit Varma]: farming but farming is that much more productive and you know jobs bring up
[Amit Varma]: elsewhere and you're stopping that whole cycle and so the FTP 2015-2020 what it
[Amit Varma]: really does is it forces the poor to subsidize the rich and it stops the poor
[Amit Varma]: from taking the subsidies that the rich are willingly offering that's absolutely
[Guest]: crazy thank you so much for coming on the show Sadhanshu thank you it was a
[Amit Varma]: very nice experience if you enjoyed listening to the scene in the unseen do
[Amit Varma]: hop over to seen unseen.in and check out all our archives you can follow me on
[Amit Varma]: Twitter at Amit Verma A-M-I-T V-A-R-M-A goodbye for now
[Amit Varma]: guys exciting news Indus Vox Media's flagship podcast Cyrus Says hosted by my
[Amit Varma]: friend Cyrus Brocha completes 200 episodes a big congratulations to Cyrus
[Amit Varma]: from me and the guests and the producers of the show for entertaining us for over
[Amit Varma]: two years now we hope to reach the 200 episode mark ourselves many many many
[Amit Varma]: weeks from now and Cyrus is an inspiration if you haven't already check
[Unknown]: out the IVM podcast website or just download their app
[Unknown]: you